---
title: "A Clarification on the Linear Algebra of Principal Component Analysis"  
date: 2026-04-01
categories: ["Statistics"]
tags: ["Multivariate Analysis", "Linear Algebra"]
---
$$\newcommand{\argmax}{\operatorname*{argmax}} $$
## Background
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a dimension reduction technique that receives applications in many scientific disciplines.  
Nevertheless, I have seen so many non-rigorous, if not completely wrong, usages on its associated terminologies, math derivations, 
interpretations, etc.  The aim of this article is to clarify some most fundamental concepts and definitions related to PCA. 

## Principal Component Directions vs. Principal Components
This is arguably the most serious misconception in PCA, even experienced statisticians and machine learning engineers confused them: 
practitioners tend to referring "principal component directions" as "principal components" or vice versa 
(e.g. [<a href='#geron2022handson'>1</a>], p. 224). Such confusion is very analogous to linear algebra students who cannot distinguish
"basis" and "coordinates (under that basis)" clearly.  A deep understanding on this linear algebra topic would help clarify on the 
differences and connections between "PC directions" and "PCs".  

To understand the core idea underlying the PCA, it is also important to clarify the meaning of the term "variance" under the PCA context. 
The "variance" appeared in the sentence such as "we are looking for the direction $v_1$ such that the variance of $Xv_1$ is maximized" 
should be interpreted as the **sample variance** of the dataset $D_1 := \\{\langle x_1, v_1\rangle, \ldots, \langle x_n, v_1\rangle\\}$. 
In other words, the PCA does not require assuming any underlying distribution of the data matrix 
$X = \begin{bmatrix} x_1^\top \\\\ \vdots \\\\ x_n^\top \end{bmatrix}$, as most statistical models do. This means that the PCA can be fully explained and demonstrated by 
linear algebra tools only without invoking any probability or statistics knowledge. In fact, as will be seen later, the term "variance" is 
completely superfluous and may be replaced with the more accurate and expressive term "norm". 

That said, let's lay out classical definitions and procedures related to the PCA: 

> Let $X = \begin{bmatrix} x_{ij}\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} x_1^\top \\\\ \vdots \\\\ x_n^\top \end{bmatrix} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times p}$ be a centered design matrix such that 
> $\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n x_{ij} = 0$ for every $j \in \\{1, \ldots, p\\}$ (namely, $e^\top X = 0^\top$ where $e := (1, \ldots, 1) \in \mathbb{R}^n$). By definition, the 
> **first principal component direction** $v_1$ is a unit vector in $\mathbb{R}^p$ such that the Euclidean norm of the vector
>  $(x_1^\top v, \ldots, x_n^\top v)^\top =: Xv$ is maximized over the unit sphere $\\{v: \\|v\\| = 1\\}$. In other words,
>
> $$ v_1 = \argmax_{\\|v\\| = 1} \\|Xv\\|^2 = \argmax_{\\|v\\| = 1} v^\top X^\top X v.$$ 
> The vector $z_1 = Xv_1 = (x_1^\top v_1, \ldots, x_n^\top v_1)^\top \in \mathbb{R}^n$, which may be regarded as the collection of magnitudes of projections 
> $x_1, \ldots, x_n$ onto the direction $v_1$, is called the **first principal component** of $X$.
>
> Having found $v_1, \ldots, v_{j - 1} \in \mathbb{R}^p$, the **$j$-th principal component direction** $v_j$ is defined as (where $L(v_1, \ldots, v_{j - 1})$ is the subspace 
> spanned by $\\{v_1, \ldots, v_{j - 1}\\}$):
> $$ v_j = \argmax_{\substack{\\|v\\| = 1 \\\\ v \perp L(v_1, \ldots, v_{j - 1})}} \\|Xv\\|^2, \quad j = 2, \ldots, p.$$
> Accordingly, $z_j = Xv_j$ is called the **$j$-th principal component** of $X$. 

From the pure linear algebra perspective, the "centered" condition of $X$ is not essential -- without imposing it, $v_1, \ldots, v_n$ can be defined in exactly the same manner.
The reason of requiring it is purely statistical: it is this condition that permits us to interpret the quadratic form $v^\top X^\top X v$ as "variance of the projected data" 
because the sample mean of $\\{x_1^\top v, \ldots, x_n^\top v\\}$ is given by $\bar{z} := \sum_{i = 1}^n x_i^\top v/n = e^\top Xv/n = 0$ whence
$$
\begin{align*}
v^\top X^\top Xv = \sum_{i = 1}^n(x_i^\top v - \bar{z})^2 = (n - 1)\hat{\sigma}^2(x_1^\top v, \ldots, x_n^\top v).
\end{align*}
$$

That $v_1, \ldots, v_p$ defined above are $p$ orthogonal eigenvectors of the matrix $X^\top X$ is a classical linear algebra result so I won't repeat the proof here (for example, 
see [<a href='#li1988linear'>2</a>], Section 7.6, Theorem 4). It is also well-known that $v_j^\top X^\top Xv_j$ equals to the $j$-th eigenvalue of $X^\top X$, where $\lambda_1 \geq
\lambda_2 \geq \cdots \geq \lambda_n > 0$. 

As mentioned earlier and should be crystal clear now, the **principal component directions** $\\{v_1, \ldots, v_p\\}$ form an orthogonal basis of $\mathbb{R}^p$,
whereas the **principal components** are collections of magnitudes of projected observations onto all the basis vectors. Although this is not strictly the same as the relationship
between "basis" and "coordinates" in linear algebra, the principal components do play the role of coordinates when we try to express the original datum under the new orthogonal 
basis (i.e., the principal component directions). For instance, we can talk about the coordinates of one observation vector $x_i$ under $V := \\{v_1, \ldots, v_p\\}$, which can 
be expressed in terms of principal components as follows:
$$
\begin{align*}
x_i = \langle x_i, v_1\rangle v_1 + \cdots + \langle x_i, v_p\rangle v_p = z_1[i]v_1 + \cdots + z_p[i]v_p, \tag{1}
\end{align*}
$$
where $z[i]$ denotes the $i$-th component of $z$. 

By comparison, under the natural basis $\\{\varepsilon_1, \ldots, \varepsilon_p\\}$ of $\mathbb{R}^p$, one has:
$$
\begin{align*}
x_i = \langle x_i, \varepsilon_1\rangle \varepsilon_1 + \cdots + \langle x_i, \varepsilon_p\rangle \varepsilon_p = x_i[1]\varepsilon_1 + \cdots + x_i[p]\varepsilon_p. \tag{2}
\end{align*}
$$
Comparing (1) and (2) would make a better sense of interpreting principal components as "coordinates": in (2), $(x_i[1], \ldots, x_i[p])$ is exactly the coordinate of the vector 
$x_i$ under $\\{\varepsilon_1, \ldots, \varepsilon_p\\}$. Albeit the coordinate $(z_1[i], \ldots, z_p[i])$ of $x_i$ under $V$ is not any single principal component $z_j$ (which by 
definition is $n$-dimensional), it can be and should be interpreted as $(\pi_i(z_1), \ldots, \pi_i(z_p))$, where $\pi_i: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ is the $i$-th 
*coordinate function* (see [<a href='#rudin1976principles'>3</a>], p. 88). That is, the coordinate of $x_i$ under $V$ is a function of combined principal components
 $\\{z_1, \ldots, z_p\\}$. In this sense, the principal components may still be loosely understood as coordinates with respect to the new basis $V$.  

## Determining PC Directions via SVD
In the machine learning literature, PC directions are usually determined by finding the singular value decomposition (SVD) of $X$ directly (as opposed to computing $X^\top X$ 
first, then finding the spectral decomposition of $X^\top X$, which is the way I learned as a undergraduate student). More explicitly, we have 
> Let $X = U\Sigma V^\top$ be the SVD of $X$, where $U \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ and $V \in \mathbb{R}^{p \times p}$ are orthogonal matrices. Then the $p$ columns of $V$
> are all the $p$ PC directions with respect to $X$.

The proof is straightforward:  Given $X = U\Sigma V^\top$, it follows that $X^\top X = V \Sigma^\top U^\top U\Sigma V^\top = V\Sigma^\top\Sigma V^\top$, namely, the spectral
decomposition of $X^\top X$ is $V\Sigma^\top\Sigma V^\top$.  This means that columns of $V$ are all the eigenvectors of $X^\top X$, thereby they are $p$ principal component 
directions with respect to $X$.

## Conclusion
Unlike the traditional perspective of considering PCA as the most important dimension-reduction technique, I am more inclined to view it as a data-driven basis-searching algorithm 
that enjoys the aforementioned properties.  It is precisely the orthogonality and the rank ordering of the new basis that endows the merits of the PCA in applications.

## References
<a id="geron2022handson"></a>
[1] Géron, A. (2022). Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow (3rd ed.). O'Reilly Media.

<a id="li1988linear"></a>
[2] Li, J. and Zha, J. (1988). Linear Algebra (in Chinese). University of Science and Technology of China Press.

<a id="rudin1976principles"></a>
[3] Rudin, W. (1976). Principles of Mathematical Analysis (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill, Inc.